\chapter{Introduction}
\label{background}

\section{Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs)}
\label{background:gags}


\subsubsection{General aspects}%The nature of GAGs}
Carbohydrates are ubiquitous building blocks found in all forms of life. As
implicated by their name, they are made of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. Despite
this rather small set of atom types, an enormous variety of carbohydrates
exists. The origin of major parts of this diversity is of combinatorial nature:
carbohydrates usually occur as polysaccharides made of many connected
monosaccharides (or \enquote{sugar rings}), whereas various different types of
monosaccharides are available in nature. They are distinguishable by their
chemical configuration, and usually there are two stereoisomers for each of
those configurations, leading to a broad spectrum of different sugar rings whose
nomenclature and chemistry are described in detail in reference books
\cite{carbohydrate_chemistry_robyt_1998, carbohydrate_chemistry_royal_2000}.
Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), reviewed in
\cite{essentials_glycobiology_gags_chapter_2009}, are a special class of
carbohydrates. GAGs play a critical role in many biological processes; they are
important for cell adhesion and cell growth, and their multifarious biological
activity arises from their ability to interact with and regulate a large number
of proteins \cite{handel_2005,gandhi_structure_2008}. Likewise, both natural and
artificial GAGs are promising tools for therapies, for instance for the design
of new bio-materials for the use in the field of regenerative medicine
\cite{whitelock_2014,schnabelrauch_tissues_2013,scott_gags_therapies_2013}.

GAGs are unbranched (linear) saccharide chains, comprised of a periodically
repeating unit, whereas each unit is made of two pyranoses (a six-membered
monosaccharide ring consisting of five carbon and one oxygen):

\nomenclature{GAG}{glycosaminoglycan}

\begin{itemize}
\item One is an amino sugar or \enquote{hexosamine}, either a
D\-/N\-/acetylglucosamine (GlcN) or a D\-/N\-/acetylgalactosamine (GalN).
\item The other is a uronic saccharide or \enquote{hexuronic acid}, either a
D-glucuronic acid (GlcA) or its C5\-/epimer L\-/iduronic acid (IdoA), or, in
seldom cases, a D\-/galactose (Gal).
\end{itemize}


\nomenclature{IdoA}{L-iduronic acid}
\nomenclature{GlcA}{D-glucuronic acid}
\nomenclature{GalN}{D-N-acetylgalactosamine}
\nomenclature{GlcN}{D-N-acetylglucosamine}


\begin{table}
\scriptsize
\centering
\renewcommand{\arraystretch}{1.3}
\begin{tabular}{lll}
\midrule
GAG type & main disaccharide & charge/\si{\elementarycharge} \\
\midrule
Heparin (HP) & L-IdoA(2S)-$\alpha$(1$\rightarrow$4)-D-GlcNS(6S)-$\alpha$(1$\rightarrow$4) & -4 \\
Chondroitin-4-sulfate (CS4) & D-GlcA-$\beta$(1$\rightarrow$3)-D-GalN(4S)-$\beta$(1$\rightarrow$4) & -2 \\
Hyaluronan (HA) & D-GlcA-$\beta$(1$\rightarrow$4)-D-GlcN-$\alpha$(1$\rightarrow$4) & -1 \\
\midrule
\end{tabular}
\caption{
Fundamentally different GAG types, their repeating disaccharide unit in IUPAC
nomenclature, and their charge per disaccharide, in units of the elementary
charge. The abbreviations given in brackets in the first column are used
throughout this thesis.}
\label{tab:bg:gagtypes}
\end{table}

\nomenclature{HP}{heparin}
\nomenclature{HA}{hyaluronan}
\nomenclature{CS4}{chondroitin-4-sulfate}
\nomenclature{CS6}{chondroitin-6-sulfate}
\nomenclature{HS}{heparan sulfate}

A special feature of GAGs is that they are usually sulfated at various ring
positions, leading to a number of possible sulfation patterns per repeating
disaccharide unit. The number of possible combinations of basic disaccharide
units, two different allowed geometries of the glycosidic linkage between them,
and variations in the sulfation pattern imply that the heterogeneity among GAGs
is large. Still, physiologically occurring GAGs can be roughly categorized into
six major GAG types. Three of those, the most important ones for this thesis,
are listed in \cref{tab:bg:gagtypes} together with their repeating disaccharide
unit, sulfation pattern, glycosidic linkage type, and with their abbreviation
used here from now on. Three other major GAG types are usually listed in
literature \cite{gandhi_structure_2008}, which play a less important role in
this thesis than the ones listed in \cref{tab:bg:gagtypes}:

\begin{itemize}
\item Heparan sulfate, which is considered to be an analogue of heparin. The
only difference is that heparan sulfate has --- on average --- a higher content
of glucuronic acid than iduronic acid.
\item Dermatan sulfate, which is similar to chondroitin sulfate, but is built of
iduronic acid instead of glucuronic acid.
\item Keratan sulfate, the only GAG type that contains a D\-/galactose
saccharide instead of an acid. The amino sugar is the same as in chondroitin
sulfate.
\end{itemize}

Except for HA, which is the only non-sulfated GAG, the naturally occurring
sulfation degree of GAGs is large, with up to three sulfate groups per
disaccharide unit in case of heparin. Considering the carboxyl group contained
in the hexuronic acid, each repeating disaccharide unit always carries at least
one negative charge at physiological pH (which is also true for HA). Adding
sulfation, this charge may rise up to -4 for heparin (see
\cref{tab:bg:gagtypes}), which in fact is the biological macromolecule with the
largest charge density known \cite{capila_linhardt_hep_prot_2002}.
\Cref{fig:bg:heparin_chemstruct} shows the chemical configuration of the
repeating disaccharide unit of heparin and schematically visualizes its
structure in space. What is depicted there actually is the disaccharide unit
which occurs \textit{most frequently} in natural heparin polysaccharides.
Polymeric GAGs in an organism can be quite long with a molecular weight of about
10 to 100\,kDa \cite{gandhi_structure_2008}, and they never reach
\SI{100}{\percent} homogeneity. That is, natural GAGs are always comprised of a
mixture of more than only two monosaccharides, and the repeating units shown in
\cref{tab:bg:gagtypes} are the \textit{predominant} ones for each of the cases.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=1.0\textwidth]{gfx/background/hp_repeating_unit_structure_01.pdf}
\caption[]{
Molecular configuration of the repeating disaccharide unit of heparin (the one
which occurs most frequently in natural heparin polysaccharides). The pyranose
to the left is a 2-O-sulfated iduronic acid (IdoA(2S)), connected via a
1$\rightarrow$4 glycosidic linkage to the 6-O-sulfated
2-deoxy-2-sulfamido-Î±-D-N\-/acetylglucosamine (GlcNS(6S)). At physiological pH,
the charge of this disaccharide is -4 elementary charges.
}
\label{fig:bg:heparin_chemstruct}
\end{figure}

There are many more than six GAG variants with established names, such as
Chondroitin\-/6\-/sulfate (CS6), which is the same as CS4, but sulfated at the
C6 position of the galactosamine instead of in the fourth position. With the GAG
types described here so far, all major characteristics of naturally occurring
GAG molecules are covered. Other GAG types are not listed, because they are not
fundamentally different from what has been described and therefore were not
investigated in the framework of this thesis.

In organisms, all GAG chains except for HA  appear covalently bound to a core
protein, comprising a so-called \textit{proteoglycan} complex
\cite{essentials_glycobiology_gags_chapter_2009}. These large structures consist
of a linear protein with GAGs covalently linked to it. Each GAG is linked to the
core protein via a special sugar linker, which itself is attached to (usually) a
serine residue of the core protein. As of the length of the GAG chains, however,
the biological functions of proteoglycans depend to a large extent only on the
interaction of its GAG chain(s) with other proteins, i.e.\ the free end of a GAG
chain can be considered unaffected by the core protein. This is one of the
fundamental assumptions applied in this thesis project: GAGs are considered and
treated as \textit{free} molecules.


%While it is likely that their tremendous length and also their covalent linkage
%to proteoglycans serve have an overall impact on the biological function of
%GAGs, it is a valid and well-established approximation to not account for these
%facts in molecular modeling studies that aim for resolving the molecular
%mechanism of protein-GAG interaction in atomic detail... in a biological
%function and overall  treated as


\subsubsection{Pyranose conformations}
\label{background:gags:conformations}

The origin and geometry of various pyranose monosaccharide conformations is
comprehensibly classified and discussed in
\cite{classification_pyranose_conformers_1960}. The conformational nomenclature
used throughout this thesis follows IUPAC rules, which are well-described in
\cite{iupac_gag_conformations_1980}.

Free in solution, most monosaccharide rings in GAGs have one clearly predominant
conformation, and their ring structure can therefore be considered
\textit{rigid}, as is the case for e.g.\ D-glucuronic acid (GlcA), which resides
in a stable ${}^{4}\mathrm{C}_1$ chair \cite{almond_jacs_2010}. Also
N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (GlcN) mainly populates the ${}^{4}\mathrm{C}_1$ ring
conformation, which was shown to be especially stable when the GlcN becomes
sulfated \cite{Sattelle_glcnac_right_chair_2011}, as is the case in heparin. The
pyranose ring of iduronic acid (IdoA), a constituent of heparin, however, is the
only GAG pyranose that is --- free in solution, i.e.\ without any mechanical
stress --- in an equilibrium of multiple so-called ring puckers. C5 carboxyl
epimerization is the only difference of IdoA compared to GlcA, and it results in
conformational instability. IdoA is postulated to be populated by a mixture of
mainly three conformations \cite{almond_jacs_2010}: ${}^{4}\mathrm{C}_1$,
${}^{1}\mathrm{C}_4$, and ${}^{2}\mathrm{S}_\mathrm{O}$. Obviously, this
conformational flexibility of IdoA is a \textit{structural flexibility} which
allows for different orientations of functional groups in space, as depicted in
\cref{fig:bg:idoa_conformations}.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=1.0\textwidth]{gfx/background/idoa_conformations_03.pdf}
\caption[]{
The three conformations (two chairs, one skew-boat) of the pyranose L-iduronic
acid which are most populated in solution. In heparin, $\mathrm{R}_1$ is a
sulfate group.}
\label{fig:bg:idoa_conformations}
\end{figure}


The exact population ratios and exchange time scales of the conformations of
IdoA are difficult to measure and simulate \cite{almond_jacs_2010,
structure_gags_progess_perspectives_2010}, but they clearly depend on the IdoA
environment. That is, a terminal IdoA behaves differently from an IdoA pyranose
within a GAG chain. As shown by Sattelle et al., the population ratio depends on
sulfation, and IdoA(2S) still prevails in an equilibrium of multiple highly
populated conformations \cite{almond_jacs_2010}. Regarding heparin-internal
IdoA(2S), MuÃ±oz-GarcÃ­a and co-workers summarize that it is in an equilibrium of
${}^{2}\mathrm{S}_\mathrm{O}$ and ${}^{1}\mathrm{C}_4$ with a negligible content
of the ${}^{4}\mathrm{C}_1$ chair \cite{conf_idoa_timeavg_restraints_2013}. The
interconversion between ${}^{2}\mathrm{S}_\mathrm{O}$ and ${}^{1}\mathrm{C}_4$
has earlier been described to exert only little geometrical change on glycosidic
linkages \cite{Mulloy_dyn_conf_heparin_2000}, rendering the overall
polysaccharide conformation independent on iduronic acid ring puckering
\cite{jin_heparin_2009}. Likewise, Gandhi and Mancera conclude that whilst the
spatial orientation of the 2-O-sulfate group in IdoA(2S) in heparin is altered
during conformation interconversion, no significant structural change can be
seen in the backbone of the polysaccharide chain \cite{gandhi_structure_2008}.


\subsubsection{General aspects about protein-GAG interaction}

It is state of knowledge that GAGs play a critical role in many biological
processes \cite{handel_2005}. In many of these scenarios, GAGs directly and
\textit{specifically} interact with proteins on the molecular level
\cite{prot_gags_glycomics_review_2006}. According to Esko and Linhardt, more
than 100 GAG-binding proteins have been described in literature
\cite{essentials_glycobiology_protgags_2009}. To a large extent, the
corresponding studies were focused on protein interaction with heparin only.
Esko and Linhardt speculate that this bias towards heparin may reflect the
commercial availability of heparin and the fact that the interaction between
proteins and heparin can be assumed to properly mimic the physiological
interaction of proteins with heparan sulfate, which is especially abundant on
cell surfaces and in the extracellular matrix. Esko and Linhardt note that
relatively few proteins are known to interact with chondroitin sulfate or
keratan sulfate. However, in some cases, especially chondroitin sulfate's
interaction with proteins may be physiologically relevant, because chondroitin
sulfate is the most abundant GAG in the body
\cite{gandhi_structure_2008} and available in many tissues
\cite{essentials_glycobiology_protgags_2009}.

In the course of countless studies, several protein-GAG systems of which it is
long known that they have huge biological impact were investigated via
structural biology methods, biochemically, and via molecular modeling approaches
in order to understand the \textit{molecular basis} of their interaction.
Fundamental findings were especially made with X-ray crystallography and via
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), both of which are able to spatially resolve
the arrangement of atoms in the bound state of a protein-GAG complex. However,
NMR and X-ray studies implicate an enormous experimental effort and often do not
succeed for certain systems, so that up to now the number of experimentally
obtained protein-GAG complex structures deposited in the PDB is still quite low
(about 85 as of today).

% Still, from these well-investigated complexes, a number of
% essential observations is to be made for this thesis work.

\nomenclature{dp}{degree of polymerization}

The experimentally resolved structures of protein-GAG complexes typically
contain GAG molecules of lengths between dp2 and dp10, with the most common
length being dp5 (\enquote{dp} stands for degree of polymerization, and the
following number is the number of monosaccharides in the molecule). Khan et al.\
argue that HP dp4 possesses a sufficient number of at least six sulfate groups
and two carboxyl groups to generate protein specificity for heparin
\cite{semi_rigid_heparin_structures_2010}. Hence, GAG binding epitopes
responsible for affinity \textit{and} specificity of the protein-GAG interaction
are typically rather short --- at least for the systems contained in the PDB so
far, and a counter-example is yet to be discovered. Likewise, recent
experimental and molecular modeling studies for the investigation of protein-GAG
systems focused on using short GAGs \cite{pichert_characterization_2012,
hintze_sergey_2014, gandhi_coombe_2008, Gandhi01102009,
mancera_gandhi_jcim_2011, agostino_mancera_gandhi_2014}. An important
observation is that in most crystal structures, GAG binding sites are found on
surface-exposed positions, almost always containing positively charged amino
acid residues (at physiological pH, which are arginine and lysine).

Regarding heparin-protein interaction, a number of crystal structures and NMR
experiments suggest that when heparin binds to a protein, the iduronic acid may
undergo an induced fit, and prefer one of its possible ring conformations
\cite{gandhi_structure_2008}. The conformational flexibility of IdoA and
therefore its ability to structurally adjust itself to a protein may be one of
the reasons why many important and high-affinity protein-GAG interactions
involve heparin, and not other GAG types. On the other hand, there are also
protein-GAG complexes for which it has been shown that IdoA in the bound state
can still assume multiple conformations \cite{barbero_jacs_2005}, in which case
the entropy penalty associated with the restriction of single degrees of freedom
would be reduced. Overall, however, the scientific community generally assumes
that heparin's pure charge density is mainly responsible for its seemingly
dominant role in protein-GAG interaction \cite{gandhi_structure_2008,
essentials_glycobiology_protgags_2009}.



\subsubsection{Structure of GAGs}

While the geometry of monosaccharides is well-investigated and in most of the
cases known with an enormous degree of detail, the investigation of the
three-dimensional solution structure of GAG polysaccharides, i.e.\ their overall
flexibility and conformation, is rather unclear and topic of ongoing research
\cite{structure_gags_progess_perspectives_2010}. The GAG structures contained in
the PDB, as stated above, are generally limited to smaller fragments of not more
than 10 monosaccharides. Among these bound structures, GAGs appear to be linear,
quite flexible molecules that do not assume a special secondary structure.
Additionally, Khan et al.\ found via X-ray scattering and constrained modeling
that longer heparin oligosaccharides (up to dp36) that are free in solution
assume a rather extended semi-rigid conformation
\cite{semi_rigid_heparin_structures_2010}. One of the most important criteria
for characterizing GAG structures are their glycosidic linkage dihedral angles.
In this regard, the X-ray and NMR measurements reported in literature very much
agree on a certain angle interval, which is accessible to all major GAG types,
conceptually comparable to the well-known backbone dihedral angle intervals
which are valid for proteins. Obviously, this kind of data enables us to
estimate whether a certain GAG structure is trustworthy or not, and it also
allows us to quantify the overall backbone flexibility of GAGs. An overview on
literature-reported heparin backbone dihedral angles can be found in e.g.\
\cite{semi_rigid_heparin_structures_2010}.


\section{Interleukin-10 (IL-10)}

\subsection{A primer on the biological relevance of IL-10}
\label{background:il10biologyprimer}

The biological relevance of the cytokine IL-10 has extensively been reviewed in
the work of Moore et al. \cite{moore_2001}. Via its ability to inhibit effector
functions of T cells, monocytes, and macrophages, its critical
\textit{in vivo} function is to limit and eventually terminate inflammatory
responses. The prime evidence in this regard are IL-10-deficient mice which show
exaggerated innate immune responses and rather spontaneously develop
inflammatory bowel disease \cite{mueller_il10defmouse_1993,
roers_il10_mice_2004,rubtsov_il10_mice_2008}. In this context, it is notable
that IL-10 is highly conserved among different species
\cite{il10_dna_rabiit_2000, porcine_il10_1995}. Specifically, the sequences
of murine and human IL-10 are naturally aligned, and their identity is
\SI{73}{\percent}. The residue conservation between murine an human IL-10 is
visualized in \cref{fig:bg:murine_human_il10_sequence}.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.7\textwidth]{gfx/background/murine_human_Il10_alignment_01.pdf}
\caption[]{
Natural sequence alignment of human and murine IL-10 (UniProt
\cite{TheUniProtConsortium01012014} identification codes P22301 and P18893,
respectively). Identical (conserved) amino acid residues are shown in blue,
similar residues in magenta. The sequence identity and similarity are
\SI{73}{\percent} and \SI{88}{\percent}, respectively. Compared to the natural
alignment, ClustalW \cite{clustalw_2008} could not further optimize
identity/similarity. The figure was created using Strap \cite{strap_website}.}
\label{fig:bg:murine_human_il10_sequence}
\end{figure}




While protective on the one hand, immune responses have the potential to
destruct not only pathogens but also host cells, and hence are a major threat to
the integrity of host tissues. Therefore, a tight regulation of immune responses
is crucial for keeping the fine balance between immunopathology and
immunosuppression, and IL-10 is one of only a few cytokines being pivotal for
down-regulating immune responses. Sabat et al.\ summarize that IL-10's special
physiological relevance lies in the prevention and limitation of over-whelming
specific and unspecific immune reactions and, in consequence, of tissue damage
\cite{sabat_bio_il10_review_2010}. Saraiva and O'Garra conclude that the absence
of IL-10 can not always be compensated by other regulatory mechanisms,
indicating a \textit{non-redundant} role for IL-10 in limiting inflammation
\cite{saraiva_ogarra_2010}. However, despite the observed anti-inflammatory
effects of IL-10, the attempts to use it directly as a therapeutic agent in
various inflammatory conditions yielded disappointing results
\cite{il10_therapy_review_2003}. The IL-10 system turned out to be more complex
than initially assumed, and it was found that its functions largely depend on
its micro-environment, i.e.\ the cells producing the cytokine
\cite{roers_mueller_2008}, the cells responding to them, and the specific immune
environment in which it is released \cite{mosser_il10_newperspectives_2008}.
Furthermore, it was found that IL-10 also has pro-inflammatory effects in
certain conditions \cite{lauw_il10_proinflamm_2000}, pointing towards an
incredibly multifaceted role of IL-10 in biology. Likewise, IL-10 is often
called a \textit{pleiotropic} cytokine. Overall, IL-10 is a crucial regulator of
immune responses, and, as Sabat et al.\ conclude, knowledge regarding IL-10
effects forces us to think about modulation of IL-10 activity as a potential
therapy \cite{sabat_bio_il10_review_2010}. A comprehensible and extensive review
about strategies for the usage of IL-10 in human disease has been published
by O'Garra et al. \cite{il10_disease_strategies_ogarra_2008}.


\subsection{IL-10 and its biological relation to GAGs}

As a regulator of inflammation, IL-10 plays a major role in tissue repair. Roers
et al.\ found in animal studies that down-regulation of IL-10 affects the repair
process and has an impact on the resulting tissue --- IL-10-deficient mice
showed a significantly enhanced re-epithelialisation and skin contraction,
suggesting that the local inflammatory response to tissue injury promotes the
repair process \cite{roers_il10mice_woundhealing_2007}. Especially in defects
and wound healing scenarios, larger concentrations of IL-10 are traveling the
space between cells for exerting IL-10's major biological effects. As of the
abundance of GAGs in tissue, in particular on cell surfaces and within the
extracellular matrix (ECM), it is a valid question to ask how GAGs might
regulate the function of IL-10 --- as of the fine balance that is required to be
maintained in regulating immune responses, even a slight modulation of IL-10
function via ECM components might be of biological significance.

The central work motivating this thesis project has been published back in 2000
by Salek-Ardakani et al.\ \cite{salek_ardakani_2000}, who have shown
experimentally that

\begin{itemize}
\item IL-10 binds HP and HS with a $\mathrm{K}_\mathrm{d}$
value in the nanomolar range (measured via affinity chromatography and surface
plasmon resonance).
\item soluble HP and HS inhibit IL-10-induced expression of CD16 and CD64 in a
concentration-dependent manner (determined via \textit{in vitro} peripheral
blood mononuclear cell proliferation experiments).
\item a reduction of sulfated proteoglycans at the cell surface negatively
affects the IL-10-induced expression of CD16 and CD64.
\end{itemize}

Hence, in these experiments, IL-10 was found to bind GAGs quite strongly and
evidence was obtained for GAGs being able to modulate IL-10 function: soluble
GAGs were shown to \textit{inhibit} the biological activity of IL-10, whereas
the reduction of the sulfation of cell-surface proteoglycans was shown to reduce
IL-10 function, i.e.\ cell-surface-attached sulfated GAGs may \textit{enhance}
IL-10 function, possibly because they facilitate the interaction between IL-10
and its transmembrane receptors.

Unfortunately, the clear results obtained by Salek-Ardakani et al.\ have so far
not been reproduced and published elsewhere in a different context, rendering
their work (\cite{salek_ardakani_2000}) to be the only point of support when it
comes to prove the ability of GAGs to modulate IL-10 function. Notably, in their
experiments, the HP concentrations required to inhibit IL-10 function by more
than \SI{50}{\percent} was quite large, with about
\SI{0.5}{\milli\gram\per\milli\liter}. Such a high concentration may be
responsible for side effects not occurring under physiological conditions.
Furthermore, the fact that polymeric high molecular weight GAGs from animal
sources (all provided by the same commercial vendor) were used in the
experiments makes it difficult to assess the effects of GAG length and impurity
on the results. Still, even considering these sources of error, the results
published by Salek-Ardakani et al.\ are rather convincing, and, as they
conclude, these findings support the hypothesis that soluble and cell-surface
GAGs and, in particular, their sulfate groups are important in modulation of
IL-10 activity, and further studies are required to identify the molecular
mechanism of GAGs binding to IL-10. Up to now, several years later, no
structural details about IL-10-GAG interaction have been published, and the
deeper biological meaning of IL-10-GAG interaction is still not clarified.

However, it is often speculated that the major role of cytokine-GAG interaction
in general could be the ability of the ECM to affect the diffusion of such
cytokines, and therefore affect their location and local concentration. In his
review of cytokine-GAG interaction, Coombe notes that it was postulated that the
interaction of cytokines with their receptors evolved independently of GAG
binding, with GAG binding being an additional feature that localizes cytokines
within tissues \cite{coombe_cytokine_gag_2008}. In any case, the investigation
of the molecular interaction between IL-10 and GAGs will provide further
insights about the relevance and the mechanism of this interaction.


\subsection{Structure of the IL-10 system}
\label{background:structureil10system}

\subsubsection{General aspects}
Shortly after the biological relevance of IL-10 had been discovered (reviewed in
1993 by Moore and O'Garra \cite{il10_first_review_1993}), huge efforts were
undertaken to resolve the three-dimensional structure of the protein itself and
of its receptors, especially by the groups of Zdanov and Walter
\cite{zdanov_review_2010, zdanov_review_2004, bookchapter_walter_il10_2004}.
From early investigations, it was clear that IL-10 is a \textit{homodimeric}
protein, comprised of two equivalent polypeptide chains of 160 amino acids each,
and with a high helical content \cite{vieira_moore_il10homodimer_1991}. The
first IL-10 structures obtained via X-ray crystallography were independently
published in 1995 by Zdanov et al.\ \cite{Zdanov1995}, and by Walter et al.\
\cite{il10_crystal_walter_1995}, and they were in agreement, considering the
resolution capacity of the experiments. In 1996, Zdanov et al.\ published
another crystal structure of IL-10 \cite{Zdanov1996}. With a spatial resolution
of \SI{1.6}{\angstrom} it is the best-resolved structure of IL-10 published to
date and contains all amino acid residues except for the first five N-terminal
ones. This structure had been deposited in the PDB with identification code 2ILK
and was used throughout this thesis project for visualization purposes, and for
\textit{in silico} experiments.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=1.0\textwidth]{gfx/background/IL10_2ilk_dimer_yellow_blue.jpg}
\caption[]{
Structure of human IL-10 according to PDB entry 2ILK (obtained via X-ray
crystallography, with a spatial resolution of \SI{1.6}{\angstrom}
\cite{Zdanov1996}) in cartoon representation, created with PyMOL \cite{pymol}.
The figure shows the IL-10 homodimer (which is the predominant form of IL-10 in
solution), made of two equivalent intertwined IL-10 monomers. One monomer is
shown in yellow and the other in purple. The dimer has two structural domains,
and each monomer contributes four helices to one domain, and two helices to the
other domain. The two domains are related by a two-fold (\SI{180}{\degree})
rotational symmetry. From the point of view shown here, it becomes obvious why
IL-10 is sometimes described to have a \enquote{V-shape}. }
\label{fig:bg:il10_dimer_vshape}
\end{figure}

\subsubsection{Structure description}

Under physiological conditions in solution, IL-10 has been shown to
predominantly exist as a \textit{homodimer} --- the population of the monomeric
form is negligible and not biologically active \cite{syto_il10_homodimer_1998}.
In literature, the name IL-10 refers to the biologically active dimeric form of
the protein. The crystal structure of the IL-10 homodimer (according to PDB
entry 2ILK) is visualized in \cref{fig:bg:il10_dimer_vshape}. IL-10 is a
so-called \enquote{intertwined} or \enquote{intercalated} dimer of two sub-units
(the monomers), each consisting of six helices, named A-F. The IL-10 dimer has
two structural domains, and each monomer contributes four helices to one domain,
and two helices to the other domain (for clarity, this is color-encoded in
\cref{fig:bg:il10_dimer_vshape}). Each of both six-helix domains is comprised of
helices A-D of one monomer, together with helices E' and F' of the other
monomer. The two monomers are intertwined in a perfectly symmetric way,
resulting in a \SI{180}{\degree} (two-fold) rotational symmetry by which both
domains of the IL-10 homodimer are related. Considering the point of view shown
in \cref{fig:bg:il10_dimer_vshape}, the overall shape of IL-10 is sometimes
equated to the letter V and therefore called \enquote{V-shape}, which I adopt in
this thesis.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.7\textwidth]{gfx/background/IL10_2ilk_disulfide_with.jpg}
\caption[]{
Structure of the human IL-10 monomer, as extracted from the homodimeric
structure with PDB code 2ILK \cite{Zdanov1996}, in cartoon representation. In
the homodimeric structure, the four-helix bundle to the left builds a domain
together with the two-helix bundle from a second IL-10 monomer. The structure of
the monomer is stabilized by two disulfide bridges, shown here in yellow. }
\label{fig:bg:il10_monomer_disulfide}
\end{figure}

The structure of the IL-10 homodimer is stable. First of all, each monomer has
approximately \SI{85}{\percent} helical content \cite{Zdanov1995}. Secondly, the
structure of each monomer is stabilized by two intramolecular disulfide bridges,
as shown in \cref{fig:bg:il10_monomer_disulfide}. Furthermore, the
interpenetration of the two monomers is tight, and the resulting domain
structure is stabilized by the formation of a large interhelical hydrophobic
core with many hydrogen bonds. Zdanov summarizes that only eight hydrophobic
residues out of 66 in the ordered part of IL-10 do not participate in the
formation of the hydrophobic core \cite{Zdanov1995}. However, whereas the two
six-helical domains are rigid for named reasons, and are unlikely to change
their conformation upon external stress, the junction between both domains,
i.e.\ the groove of the V-shape, bears the potential for some hinge-like
flexibility \cite{Zdanov1995}. Also, according to Zdanov, the N-terminal
residues 1-5 (which were not resolved in the crystal structure 2ILK)
\enquote{are disordered and probably turn away from the interdomain interface
and assume multiple conformations in solvent} \cite{Zdanov1996}.


\subsubsection{IL-10 and its receptors}


\vspace{0.5cm}
\textit{\textbf{IL-10 signaling requirements.}}
In the course of many studies it has been found that two receptor proteins are
required for IL-10 to exhibit its biological function: the primary high affinity
receptor IL-10R1 and the secondary low affinity receptor IL-10R2
\cite{mosser_il10_newperspectives_2008}. The established model in literature is
that IL-10 first binds to the transmembrane receptor IL-10R1, which itself is
associated with the Janus tyrosine kinase Jak1. Subsequent binding of IL-10R2 to
the intermediate IL-10/IL-10R1 complex recruits the kinase Tyk2, which initiates
a cascade of signal transduction events that include tyrosine phosphorylation of
Jak1 and Tyk2, trans-phosphorylation of both IL-10 receptor chains, and
activation and nuclear translocation of the transcription factor STAT3
\cite{donnelly_finbloom_il10_1999}. The idea that ternary complex formation
occurs in a sequential fashion, whereas IL-10/IL-10R1 binding is required for
the ternary complex IL-10/IL-10R1/IL-10R2 to form has been supported by a study
of Yoon et al., which suggested that IL-10/IL-10R1 binding triggers a
conformational change in a couple of IL-10 residues important for IL-10R2
binding \cite{il10r2_conf_changes_2006}.

As described above, the IL-10 homodimer has two equivalent six-helical domains.
In various original publications and in recent reviews about the IL-10 system it
is suggested or even presented as common knowledge that a large ternary complex
is required for signaling, involving \textit{both} domains of the IL-10 dimer,
\textit{two} IL-10R1 molecules, and \textit{two} IL-10R2 molecules
(\enquote{IL-10 signals through a two-receptor complex consisting of two copies
each of IL-10R1 and IL-10R2} \cite{mosser_il10_newperspectives_2008},
\enquote{Functional IL-10 receptor complexes are tetramers consisting of two
IL-10R1 polypeptide chains and two IL-10R2 chains.}
\cite{donnelly_finbloom_il10_1999}, \enquote{The IL-10 receptor complex on cells
is composed of four transmembrane polypeptides: two chains of IL-10R1 that bind
ligand and two chains of IL-10R2 that initiate signal transduction}
\cite{pestka_2004_il10_receptors_review}). However, Josephson et al.\ published
in year 2000 that the interaction of \textit{one} domain of the IL-10 homodimer
with \textit{one} molecule of IL-10R1 and \textit{one} molecule of IL-10R2 is
sufficient for activation of the intracellular kinases Jak1 and Tyk2, i.e.\ for
cellular responses to IL-10 \cite{il10_monomer_2000}, and their experimental
procedure and conclusions are rather convincing. Being sure about the minimal
molecular system required for triggering IL-10 function is especially important
to keep in mind when considering artificial modulation of the IL-10 system.

\vspace{0.5cm}
\textit{\textbf{Primary receptor IL-10R1.}} The X-ray crystal structure of the
IL-10 homodimer in complex with the extracellular domain of its high affinity
transmembrane receptor IL-10R1 has been published in 2001 \cite{Josephson2001}
and deposited in the PDB with identification code 1J7V. It has a spatial
resolution of \SI{2.9}{\angstrom} and revealed that IL-10R1 binds to the
\enquote{sides} of the IL-10 V-shape, as depicted in
\cref{fig:bg:il10_il10r1_complex}.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=1.0\textwidth]{gfx/background/il10r1_il10_complex_topside_02.jpg}
\caption[]{
Structure of the human IL-10 homodimer (yellow) in complex with the
extracellular domain of its high affinity transmembrane receptor IL-10R1 (gray),
both in cartoon representation, according to PDB entry 1J7V (obtained via X-ray
crystallography, with a spatial resolution of \SI{2.9}{\angstrom}
\cite{Josephson2001}). The top panel shows IL-10 from the same point of view as
used in \cref{fig:bg:il10_dimer_vshape}, i.e.\ it shows the \enquote{front/back}
direction of the V-shape. The bottom panel shows the V from the
\enquote{top-to-bottom} perspective, as indicated with the small arrow in the
top panel. In this terminology, the IL-10R1 molecules bind to the
\enquote{sides} of the V. Although two IL-10R1 molecules are shown in the
figure, their binding to IL-10 is independent, and only one IL-10R1 molecule is
required for triggering the IL-10 signal cascade.}
\label{fig:bg:il10_il10r1_complex}
\end{figure}

According to the authors of the crystal structure, about 27 residues from IL-10
make contact with IL-10R1. These residues are mostly polar and divided into two
structurally distinct interaction surfaces, both on the side of the IL-10
V-shape. A deeper structural characterization of the interaction between IL-10
and IL-10R1 can be found in the work of Josephson et al. \cite{Josephson2001},
and in a comprehensive book chapter on the structural properties of the IL-10
system by Walter \cite{bookchapter_walter_il10_2004}.


\vspace{0.5cm}
\textit{\textbf{Secondary receptor IL10-R2.}}
IL-10R2, the secondary low affinity transmembrane receptor of IL-10, is a
\textit{shared} receptor among the so-called IL-10 family of cytokines: besides
for IL-10, it serves as a receptor for IL-22, IL-26, and IFN-$\lambda$
\cite{zdanov_review_2010}. The scientific community was so far not able to
crystallize the entire ternary complex of the IL-10 system. That is, despite of
certain modeling efforts, the structure involving the IL-10 homodimer as well as
IL-10R1 and IL-10R2 in a single complex has not been determined with all
certainty up to now. Also, so far no other ternary complex structure from the
IL-10 family of cytokines involving IL-10R2 has been published. However, in
2010, the crystal structure of the extracellular domain of IL-10R2 alone was
published by Yoon et al. \cite{il10r2_structure_2010}. It has a resolution of
\SI{2.1}{\angstrom} and was assigned the PDB identification code 3LQM.


\vspace{0.5cm}
\textit{\textbf{Ternary complex (IL-10 + IL-10R1 + IL-10R2) model.}}
Before 2012, various different (and contradictory) models of the ternary IL-10
signaling complex were published, most of them based on rational positioning
using the input of certain experimental data, and sometimes using \textit{in
silico} molecular modeling techniques \cite{zdanov_review_2010, Josephson2001,
yoon_samestructdifffct_2005, il10r2_conf_changes_2006, il10r2_structure_2010}.


\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=1.0\textwidth]{gfx/background/il10dimer_surface_r1cartoon_r2cartoon_front_06_small.jpg}
\caption[]{
Model of the ternary IL-10 signaling complex with the IL-10 homodimer shown in
gray surface representation, and IL-10R1 (green) and IL-10R2 (magenta) shown in
cartoon representation. The single structures are taken from PDB entries 2ILK
(IL-10), 1J7V (IL-10R1), and 3LQM (IL-10R2). The relative positioning of the
three molecules is based on the recently published structure of the ternary
IL-20/IL-20R1/IL-20R2 complex (PDB 4DOH \cite{logsdon_il20r2compl_2012}), and
has been derived in a simple structural alignment procedure.}
\label{fig:bg:il10_il10r1_il10r2_model}
\end{figure}

In 2012, the crystal structure of the ternary IL-20/IL-20R1/IL-20R2 complex was
published by the Walter group and deposited in the PDB under the access code
4DOH \cite{logsdon_il20r2compl_2012}. This is the first publicly known ternary
complex structure in the IL-10 family of cytokines. It seems obvious that an
alignment of IL-10 system components onto the corresponding molecules of the
IL-20 system provides one of the most reliable models for the geometrical
arrangement of molecules in the ternary IL-10 system. Since this has not been
published and discussed in literature so far, I have created this rather simple
model, using rudimentary structural alignment tools as implemented in PyMOL
\cite{pymol}. Specifically, I have first aligned the entire ternary IL-20 system
(4DOH) onto the IL-10/IL-10R1 complex (1J7V) via alignment of IL-20R1 onto
IL-10R1. Both R1 molecules are structurally highly similar, with a C-$\alpha$
RMSd of \SI{2.2}{\angstrom}. In a second step, I have aligned the IL-10
homodimer (2ILK) onto IL-20 of the 4DOH system. IL-20 is structurally similar to
a single six-helical domain of IL-10, yielding a C-$\alpha$ RMSd of
\SI{3.3}{\angstrom}. Lastly, I have aligned IL-10R2 (3LQM) onto IL-20R2 of the
4DOH system. The global geometry of IL-20R2 and IL-10R1 is very similar, but due
to significant differences in various loops and interdomain angles, the
C-$\alpha$ RMSd after alignment of both molecules is \SI{6.3}{\angstrom}. The
resulting model is depicted in \cref{fig:bg:il10_il10r1_il10r2_model}. In
summary, it contains the IL-10 homodimer structure from PDB entry 2ILK, the
IL-10R1 structure 1J7V, and the IL-10R2 structure 3LQM. While this simple model
should not be taken literally on the scale of single atomic contacts, the
overall global positioning of molecules with respect to each other likely
matches that of the naturally occurring ternary IL-10 signaling complex.
Therefore, it can serve to give an impression about GAG molecule binding
locations that could potentially interfere with receptor binding.


\section{In silico methods for investigating protein-GAG interaction}

\subsubsection{Approximations in GAG representation: isolation, length, purity}

As has been stated in \cref{background:gags}, one of the fundamental assumptions
applied in this thesis project is that GAGs can be treated as \textit{free}
molecules. A more severe approximation applied in this and other projects is the
treatment of GAGs as \textit{short} molecules (mostly as tetra- or
hexasaccharides). This approximation is supported by, as stated above, the fact
that most protein-GAG complexes in the PDB contain only short GAG fragments, and
that tetra- or hexasaccharide fragments are long enough for exerting a certain
amount of specificity --- for pure combinatorial reasons. Also, considering the
level of atomic detail that should be observed in this and comparable projects,
a representation of GAGs as polymeric molecules would introduce a hindering
amount of complexity. That said, it is a common approximation for the
\textit{in silico} investigation of protein-GAG systems to represent GAGs as
short oligosaccharides. At the same time, one should stress that the large
length of GAGs in biological systems and also their covalent linkage to
proteoglycans most likely have an overall biological purpose. However, in
molecular modeling studies aiming for resolving the small-scale molecular
details of protein-GAG interaction it is not helpful to account for these
effects.

Another notable approximation usually applied in \textit{in silico}
investigations of protein-GAG systems affects the atomic details of the GAG:
when treating GAGs as short molecules, they are usually represented by the ideal
periodic repetition of the most frequently observed disaccharide unit.
Variations in the monosaccharide sequence are ignored.

In \textit{in silico} models, the physical properties even of short and
perfectly periodic GAGs are still challenging to properly represent. One reason
is their high flexibility, i.e.\ their rather large number of degrees of freedom
(DOFs). For heparin, the number of DOFs is even higher than for all other GAGs,
as of the conformational flexibility of the iduronic acid (as described above).
The details of these challenges are described in the corresponding chapters.

\subsection{A primer on docking methods}

Molecular \enquote{docking} is a method for predicting a stable binding mode of
a given receptor-ligand system. That is, molecular docking aims to solve an
optimization problem in which the optimal binding configuration between two
molecules is searched for. The two main ingredients required for any classical
docking method are a so-called scoring function (which is nothing else than a
multi-dimensional potential), and a search algorithm, which attempts to sample a
certain conformational space (whose dimensionality is determined by the degrees
of freedom of the system) in order to find the optimal binding configuration.
\textit{Classical} molecular docking methods are developed with the goal to be
computationally efficient, and for reaching this goal a number of severe
approximations is usually implemented in such methods. Among others, the
following approximations are common among classical docking methods:

\begin{itemize}
\item Solvent is either ignored or considered only implicitly.
\item The larger of both molecules, usually called receptor, is often treated
statically, i.e.\ it has zero degrees of freedom, or is only partly treated as
pseudo-flexible.
\item Flexibility in the ligand molecule is often approximated: bond lengths are
fixed, and certain torsion angles are kept fixed.
\end{itemize}

Plenty of classical molecular docking methods have been developed for various
types of molecular systems. What most of them have in common is their heuristic
approach for yielding low computational resource requirements: the scoring
function of these approaches is kept simple, with only a couple of free
parameters. Sometimes these parameters have, on purpose, no physical meaning.
The parameters are then tuned to a training data set until convergence is
achieved. That is, if such a docking method is applied to a molecular system
from the training data set, success is almost guaranteed. However, if it is
applied to a molecular system not included the training data set, the validity
of the resulting data strongly depends on the similarity of that system to the
training data set. As this similarity is difficult to quantify, the systematical
error contained in classical docking results is often impossible to determine.
Likewise, a problematic side effect of the severe approximations usually made in
classical docking methods is their tendency to suggest false positives as good
binders.

So far, no docking method has been specifically developed for protein-GAG
systems. In previous studies, AutoDock 3 (AD3) \cite{Morris1998} has been shown
to be able to produce reasonable docking results for protein-GAG systems
\cite{japan_docking_ad3_clustering, samsonov_docking_2011}. However, these were
\textit{local} docking studies with the docking search space limited to only a
small part of the receptor protein --- a previously known binding site. With
respect to IL-10, no GAG binding information is available which would allow for
such an \textit{a priori} reduction of the search space volume. In principal,
docking approaches could also be applied in such a scenario, which could then be
called \textit{global} or \textit{blind} docking. However, compared to local
docking, these conditions impose incomparably high challenges with respect to
scoring and sampling, and the validity of the resulting data becomes even more
questionable.

\subsection{A primer on molecular dynamics simulations}

\nomenclature{MM}{molecular mechanics}
\nomenclature{MD}{molecular dynamics}

In molecular mechanics (MM) methods, a set of atoms (an N-body system) is
modeled using classical Newton mechanics. Each atom is treated as a point mass
with certain parameters and exposed to a set of classical potentials. In this
description, the energy of a molecule can be modeled as a function of its atom
coordinates, i.e.\ of its conformation. In a so-called molecular dynamics (MD)
simulation, the atom coordinates are \textit{time-evolved} via numerical
integration of the classical equations of motion. The movement of the atoms is
simulated for a certain amount of time, and valuable data can be extracted from
the resulting trajectory. The modeled system is usually coupled to an external
heat bath of constant temperature, and a barostat is applied in order to
simulate a certain pressure. Often, periodic boundary conditions are applied in
order to represent the behavior of an infinitely large system via simulation of
a single unit cell. The MD approach has a long-standing history in the
simulation of the dynamics of biological molecules, as reviewed and described in
many details in standard literature
\cite{mccammon1988dynamics}.

The \enquote{bonded} potentials included in today's standard MD methods as
implemented for instance in the Amber suite \cite{original_amber_1981,
amber_overview_2013} are approximated as harmonic potentials (for bond lengths
between two connected atoms, bond angles between three connected atoms) or as
Fourier series (torsion angle in four connected atoms). The \enquote{non-bonded}
potentials are the Coulomb point charge potential and a 6-12 Lennard-Jones
potential for approximating the van der Waals interaction. Since non-bonded
interactions quickly decay towards zero, but would still require a pair-wise sum
over all atoms in the system, usually a so-called non-bonded cutoff distance is
implemented, beyond which non-bonded interactions are ignored (in case of the
6-12 potential), or modeled more efficiently (via the Ewald sum method in case
of electrostatic interactions).

The analytical form of the applied potentials and the set of parameters used in
the simulation for describing the molecular system (comprised of atomic mass,
van der Waals radii, atomic point charges, bond force constants, bond angle
force constants, and bond torsion force constants) together fully defines the
forces exerted on single atoms, and is therefore called \enquote{force field},
for historical reasons. For proteins, DNA, and carbohydrates the analytical form
of the potentials used is usually the one as described above. Hence, the actual
challenge in developing proper force fields for certain molecular systems is to
map their real physical characteristics onto the MM parameters. The central idea
of MM approaches is that these parameters are valid for groups of atoms and
transferable to other molecules. For many types of bio-molecules it can be said
that this task has largely been fulfilled by the scientific community: the
classical physical properties of proteins for instance can reliably be simulated
using for instance the so-called FF99SB force field
\cite{ff99sbvalidation_2009}. Of major relevance for this project is  the fact
that carbohydrates can quite reliably be modeled using the GLYCAM force field,
thanks to the efforts of Kirschner et al. \cite{kirschner_glycam06:_2008}.
Furthermore, solvent molecules and ions can be represented in explicit form in
MD simulations.

The computational complexity of MD simulations is rather large, especially
compared to classical docking approaches. However, given a proper force field
and system setup, the resulting data usually is physically meaningful.


\subsubsection{End-point free energy methods (\enquote{MM-PB(GB)SA})}
% This label is required in DMD chapter.
\label{methods:mmpbsa_mmgbsa}

\hl{TODO: Write a small section.}
Cite this: \cite{schlick_innovationsdynamics_2012} (volume 2, chapter 12).
\lipsum[1-5]
